 Speaking in his most closely watched speech of the year, Jerome H. Powell, the chair of the Federal Reserve, clearly signaled on Friday that the central bank was poised to cut interest rates in September. And while Mr. Powell stopped short of giving a clear hint at just how large that move might be, he forcefully underscored that the central bank stands prepared to adjust policy to protect the job market from weakening further and to keep the economy on a path for a soft landing. “The time has come for policy to adjust,” Mr. Powell said during the Kansas City Fed’s annual conference at Jackson Hole in Wyoming. “The direction of travel is clear, and the timing and pace of rate cuts will depend on incoming data, the evolving outlook and the balance of risks.” He then added: “We will do everything we can to support a strong labor market as we make further progress toward price stability.” Mr. Powell’s speech was his firmest declaration yet that the Fed is turning a corner in its fight against inflation. Mr. Powell did not provide a clear outline for the path ahead, but by focusing on risks to the labor market, he did clearly hint that central bankers are willing to cut interest rates quickly rather than gradually if the job market appears to be at risk. “We do not seek or welcome further cooling in labor market conditions,” he said, later adding that a strong labor market could be maintained with “an appropriate dialing back of policy restraint.” The unemployment rate jumped in July, and Fed officials will receive August jobs data on Sept. 6, just ahead of their next meeting. “The upside risks to inflation have diminished,” Mr. Powell said in his speech. Some economists even think the Fed might be on the verge of nailing a “soft landing,” in which inflation and the economy cool down sustainably without major pain. The unemployment rate is “still low by historical standards, but almost a full percentage point above its level in early 2023,” Mr. Powell said on Friday, noting also that the increase was mainly coming as hiring slowed and new applicants took time to land work — not as people lost jobs. “Even so, the cooling in labor market conditions is unmistakable.” Even as he voiced caution, Mr. Powell also used his speech to review how far the Fed has come in its inflation fight. “The good ship Transitory was a crowded one, with most mainstream analysts and advanced-economy central bankers on board,” Mr. Powell said, defending the central bank’s stance. When price increases did not fade, the Fed reacted by jerking rates higher in 2022, and Mr. Powell warned that economic pain might result.